# H2 File Format

The H2 file format expresses a parser built upon the V1 virtual machine micro-parser nodes. An H2 file contains a series of "rule" nodes. A rule node takes the following syntax:

(A rule name followed by an equals sign followed by a pattern followed by a new line.)

<rule list>=<rule> or
<rule> <rule list>

<rule>=
<rule name>=<pattern>(newline)

<pattern>=
<character class pattern>
or <string literal pattern>
or <or pattern>
or <sequence pattern>
or <and pattern>
or <multiple pattern>
or <not pattern>
or <optional pattern>
or <entire pattern>

<character class pattern>=
CHARACTER_CLASS[<string>]

<string literal pattern>=
STRING_LITERAL[<string>]

<or pattern>=
OR[<pattern list>]

<sequence pattern>=
SEQUENCE[<pattern list>]

<and pattern>=
AND[<pattern list>]

<multiple pattern>=
MULTIPLE[<pattern list>]

<not pattern>=
NOT[<pattern>]
<optional pattern>=
OPTIONAL[<pattern>]

<entire pattern>=
ENTIRE[<pattern>]

<pattern list>=
<pattern> or
<pattern>,<pattern list>

<string>=any letter, but the ']' symbol is replaced with ENC(R)

List of Simple program specification language patterns and their description:

OR[] pattern:
-------------

Usage example:

DIGIT = OR['1','2','3', '4','5', '6','7', '8', '9', '0']

Here, the DIGIT rule would match any one of the strings '1', '2', '3', ... etc. Strings in the Simple language consist of a single quote followed by one or more letters, followed by an end quote. If you happen to need the single quote as a character, you can use the symbol S_QUOTE. For example:

QUOTES = OR['"', S_QUOTE]

The input to OR can be either a rule name or another pattern.

SEQUENCE[] pattern:
-------------------

Usage example:

WORD_CAT = SEQUENCE['ca', 't']

Here, the rule WORD_CAT matches the string 'cat' because the SEQUENCE construct matches anything that specifies all of the patterns inside of it. Each pattern inside the square brackets of the sequence construct is separated by a comma.

You can combine OR and SEQUENCE constructs to make up rules. For example:

SUPERPERSON = SEQUENCE['SUPER', OR['MAN','WOMAN']]

The above rule would match either the string 'SUPERMAN' or 'SUPERWOMAN'.

NOT[] pattern:
--------------
Usage example:

NOT_SIDNEY = NOT['Sidney']

This rule would match any string except for the string 'Sidney'. Note that the string 'Sidneys' would match because although it starts with the string 'Sidney', it is different from it due to the extra trailing s.

MULTIPLE[]:
-----------
Usage example:

BINARY_STRING = MULTIPLE[OR['0', '1']]

This would match strings that start with 1 or more characters which are either 0 or 1. For example, '01001001' would match. 'a0000' would not match.

MULTIPLE indicates that for a string to match, the inner pattern must be matched 1 or more times. In the above example, the inner pattern is OR['0','1']. Any string consisting of multiple consecutive inner patterns will be matched by the MULTIPLE pattern.


OPTIONAL[]:
-----------
Usage example:

JUDGEMENT = SEQUENCE['JUDG', OPTIONAL['E'], 'MENT']

This would match either the strings 'JUDGMENT' or 'JUDGEMENT'.

CHARACTER_CLASS[]:
------------------
Usage example:
```
ALPHABET = CHARACTER_CLASS['abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ']
```

This matches any string that starts with  magiscule or miniscule letters of the alphabet. For example, 'dfasfasdfa' would match. 'dsfads1' would also  match everything up to but not including the '1'.

rule name pattern:
------------------
Usage example:

RULE_1 = 'SOCKET'

RULE_2 = 'WRENCH'

RULE_3 = SEQUENCE[RULE_1,RULE_2]

RULE_4 = RULE_3

RULE_3 above would match the string 'SOCKETWRENCH'. RULE_4, because it is defined to be equal to RULE_3, would also match 'SOCKETWRENCH'. In other words, you can refer to the names of the rules you have defined by name.

string literal pattern:
----------------------
Usage example:

CLING_WORD = 'cling'

The above rule would match strings that start with 'cling'. For example, 'clingon' would be a match.

By combining multiple rules and patterns together, you can end up with some really useful expressions.