# M1 File Format

The M1 file format is a serialization format for the V1 node collection. Any parsing machine built using the V1 node collection can be serialized into M1 format and exported to a file. Then, another parsing machine can be rebuilt using data from the M1 file, even if the V1 node collection was built using another language. Essentially, the M1 format allows for transferring virtual machines across any programming language that implements the V1 node collection and the M1 import/export algorithm.

The documentation makes reference to M1-escaped format, which is a necessary encoding

# Terminal nodes
Summary:
<terminal node> := '[' <node type> ',' <string value> ']'

Description:

For nodes that do not have children(string literal and character class nodes), the M1 format will have 5 components concatenated together in a string:

1. The character '['.
2. One of the node type names.
3. The character ','.
4. An arbitrary string value encoded in M1-escaped format.
5. The character ']'.

That is a left square bracket followed by the standardized name of the nodes in miniscule followed by a comma followed by the value of the 'string' property associated with either a character class or a string literal.

# Non-terminal Nodes
For nodes that have one or more micro-parser nodes as children, the M1 format will be a square bracket followed by a node type followed by a comma-separated list of child nodes encoded in the M1 format.

In other words:

<node>=
<terminal node>
or
[<node type>,<children list>]

<node type>=
'character class' or 'string literal' or 'or' or 'sequence' or 'and' or 'multiple' or 'not' or 'optional' or 'entire'.

<children list>=
<node>
or
<node>,<children list>

# M1-escaped Format
One character is forbidden inside the string value for the terminal nodes. This string is: ']'. To encode this value, the replacement value of ENC(R) is used.

