# V1 Virtual Machine

The V1 virtual machine is a kind of algorithm or description of how parsing with micro-parsers works. Consider a typical parsing scenario: there is a grammar, an input program, and a set of outputs.

The grammar is expressed as a tree(or graph expressed as a tree) made up of micro-parsers for its nodes and the input program is interpreted to be a string that is fed into the grammar tree.

Each node in the grammar tree can be thought of as a function that takes in a string input, and possibly some other related metadata, and produces an output object. Different nodes in the grammar tree represent different functions, but each node individually is meant to be have a simple implementation and operational purpose. Nodes may have internal state.

To illustrate the idea of a micro-parser node and its operation, consider a simplified string literal micro-parser. This micro-parser is initialized with an internal string(call it s). During operation, the simplified string literal micro-parser takes in an input string, i, and compares it with s. If s is equal to i, then the micro-parser emits a an object: {match: true}. If s is not equal to i, then the micro-parser emits the object: {match: false}. These output objects are called 'match objects' and can contain arbitrary information, depending on the micro-parser. Typically, non-simplified match objects contain information about the input string fed into the output object, the length of any matches, whether a match was found or not, and other information necessary to categorize the different parts of an input program.

By feeding strings into different micro-parsers using a feeding algorithm and analyzing the so-called 'match objects' produced as output, it is possible to build complete parsers of real-life programming languages. The V1 Virtual Machine is the description of various micro-parsers used by the Simple Parser Generator, some rules governing their organization and the algorithm by which these micro-parsers obtain strings for input data for producing match objects.

# Character Class


* Sequence

The 'sequence' micro-parser takes

* Or
* And
* Multiple
* Not
* Optional
* String Literal
* Entire
* Rule Name
* Rule
* Rule List